Good morning, everyone.
Morning, morning, morning, mayor.
Um, we've, we've got you here for an hour.
Thank you very much for coming in.
Uh, we've, uh, we've already seen at least Dave, uh,
last week, um, and, uh, board minister,
and, um, so we'll, we'll, we'll give it over to you
for a few minutes to, uh, to make some,
any introductory comments and then look forward to the
free wide ranging conversation.
Thank. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks for inviting us.
And just introduce, uh, to me, right, CFO,
Jason Dale, uh, Dale Wilson.
Dale's our chief customer and, uh, growth officer.
David Gordon looks after our metros
and capital programs in Duncan to our left, uh, looks
after her own business.
So, um, apologies from our board chair
because neither the acting chair
or the current acting deputy chair could be here today.
Uh, Sue Tyndall has been appointed as Key Rail's
chair starting one July,
and we look forward to Introduc to her next time.
But we are here. Um, I know my marks need to be, uh, brief,
so I'll get into it pretty quick.
Um, key rail is driving performance and going after growth,
and we've gotta focus in three key areas, safety,
performance, value, and briefly I'll go through those.
We're making a significant investment in our safety culture.
We're invested in training, technology and leadership,
and have an intense focus on reducing critical risks
and catastrophic risks.
We've had one serious harm injury
so far this financial year, compared
with sixth the previous year.
Our near misses that could result in a serious injury
or fatality have reduced 34%,
uh, compared to the previous year.
Uh, however, we still have a lot to do
to reduce the incident of critical risks,
which are still occurring.
Uh, and that is a core focus of management.
All injuries have reduced by 12% in the last 12 months,
and over 20% over the last two years.
And about 50 to 55%
of our injuries are slips, trips, and falls.
So a core focus on critical risk. Let's move to performance.
We're aiming to become customers first choice
for moving freight and people.
We have a strong customer led strategy for growth,
but this requires us to improve our reliability,
customer service, labor,
and asset productivity to ensure our pricing is competitive.
That's how the key rail above rail business,
or what we call our services business, will be sustainable.
And the goal is to have it standing on its own two feet.
Uh, after a long era of managed decline,
there's been 10 billion of investments since 2019
to help us build the platform for growth.
It's taking time to realize the benefits of that investment.
For example, even though funding
for our new Reliable Loco fleet was announced in budget
2021, the first two Locos are not yet in service
that we we're doing commissioning,
and they'll be in service in the next couple of months.
The next couple of years, we will see a number
of our assets come into service.
This streamlined fleet will help us lift reliability,
but we're already starting to make strides.
Uh, we call our fleet reliability dfo,
which is delivery in full on time for our customers.
It's the number one criteria when you're in the transport
game, that's your increased, your 86%,
and for our larger bulk and container traffic to
and from ports, it's now over 95% For
customers such as fontera.
Uh, the on-time performance from our premium freight service
is 90% in gradually lifting.
Our reliability for the inter island has been a standout.
At the end of quarter three was 98%.
In May, it was a hundred.
And over the last summer peak,
it was over a hundred percent.
I think that compares considerably against percent.
Hundred percent. It was a hundred percent.
I think that compares very well against
global airline businesses.
We've seen a, we've seen a strong improvement from
that from our customer service ratings.
Freight revenue, uh, for the last year, uh,
against tough economic conditions is in line with last year.
Despite the significant headwinds
and the closure of Windstone pulp,
which was our fourth largest freight customer,
our revenue from our scenic train services is
22% up on last year.
And we are on track to deliver our SCI full operating
surplus target for 110 million.
Uh, impact that will be impacted by the cost of redundancies
for our theory, which we are working through.
Now, let's turn quickly to value for money.
You'll know we've embarked on a
transformation of our business and work.
We're working hard to control costs, lift asset utilization,
lift labor productivity.
Our external costs, excluding our infrastructure
projects are down 3%.
Overall head count is down 7% over the past year.
There's very strange to our transformation plan.
And one is, and,
and we, what we're doing is we're taking hundreds
of ideas from a people to create savings and grow revenue.
Quick example, if you have two locomotives running together
for a heavy train, um, there's only a locomotive engineer
or a train driver in the front one.
So when the loco's riddling the train driver, the alley has
to get down from the first loco,
climb into the following loco and switch it off
and switch it on again when it's time to move.
Now, an idea from our frontline people was
that we are now doing that remotely,
and by using it, we estimate we'll save 1.2 million
liters of fuel a year.
That's just one of the initiatives from our people.
But in the last nine months of 25,
our transformation initiatives have delivered 37 million
of savings and margin improvement.
Lastly, let me say a little bit about metro
infrastructure business.
We do understand the frustration when we halt services
as we recently did over and over the, uh, Easter
and uh, Christmas period.
But we do that so we can work 24 hours a
day to improve the network.
Uh, we're not just, um, update the network in some areas.
It is a complete rebuild of our foundations.
We choose times of lower patrons to limit disruptions.
However, we're getting results in Auckland.
Our infrastructure liability for metro services is at 98.9%.
Punctuality, arriving within five minutes
of the expected times is 95%.
For Kiwi Rail on Wellington, our reliability is 99.6%.
That means of 104,000 services that was scheduled
between one July last year
and Monday this week, 0.4% were canceled
because of key rail.
The key rail punctuality is 95.6% in Wellington,
but it's 82% when all factors not just key rail accounted.
'cause of course, we do not operate
the trains in other city.
In summary, um, this is a short overview
of the focus on performance.
We do face challenges in the domestic
and global economies as our nation does,
and in the complex environments, which we operate,
but we are confident we're taking the right steps
to build an efficient network,
lift customer service, and be competitive.
So we grow and as we know, the more freight volume,
we carry the greater returns on the public's investment,
including benefits like reduced road con to congestion,
reduced carbon, reduced maintenance, cotton
and maintenance costs on that basis.
Happy to take your questions,
Peter. Thank you very much.
Um, who's gonna kick us off?
You should look over there. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you.
And we'll, we'll make a pretty free ranging in terms of
where we wanna go, but if there's a particular theme,
right? We'll, uh, we'll follow
That with Through. No worries. Thanks
Mr. Chair. Um,
thanks Peter and, and the team.
Um, hopefully this first question won't come as a surprise
because I did raise it last week
and it was parked to this week.
It is about the maintenance costs for the existing fleet.
Um, and we were told that that information will be
provided to us today.
So could you just run me through, um, two things.
One is what the maintenance schedule
of the existing fleet is, um, including dry dock,
uh, and what is the associated costs, um, for
That. Okay. So I, I'll
get Duncan to cover the, the, the program
of dry dock and what we're paying for,
and I'll ask Jason to cover the mainten as possible.
Thanks, Duncan. Um, so with the existing fleet,
we have a strong regulatory requirement.
Uh, and that includes a dry dock every two, two years.
So as we move to a two ship fleet, we will see one
of those ferries go to dry dock annually,
and we'll be able to rotate that over a two year period.
Uh, as well as that we have what we, the, the other ferry
that's not going to a dry dock.
We have, we'll have a wet dock, which is an extended period
of time where it's laid up in, in Wellington,
where we can do other maintenance on it as well.
We also have, uh, a regular once a week, 24 hour period,
or there are thereabouts
where other additional maintenance is done.
And that builds up the total asset management plan for,
for the ferries dry dock, where it comes out of the water,
where there's dig, maintenance done, wet dock, where we do,
um, sort of mid-level maintenance
and then day-to-day maintenance
as we are either on the run or when it's tied up.
Can I just ask before we move to the, the money side
of things, um, what sort of timeframe are we talking about?
So when a vessel is, uh, out for dry dock,
how long does it take to get to where that, I mean,
we assume this is through Singapore
because of the, um, defense force.
Mm-hmm. Non reliability,
which we understand in across Tasman.
So there are no dry docks in New Zealand.
Yeah, the closest one is Sydney,
and that's, as you said, is, uh, controlled
by Australian Defense Force, who quite Riley
prioritized their own vessels.
So from a commercial perspective, we go to Singapore
where we can guarantee the space
and the time, uh, the transit to Singapore, the dry dock
and the return, it depends, but it's a minimum a month
and can sometimes go to six or seven weeks.
And that can depends on what type of dry dock,
because the regulatory requirements are
that every second dry dock is a, is a deeper one where we,
we do other types of maintenance that take longer, um,
from the cost of the maintenance.
Obviously that's commercially sensitive
'cause we use the same contractors as their competition.
But what I can say in 2023,
there was a significant increase into 2020 fours level money
spent on, on maintenance of the drive the fleet.
And we have continued that through 2025
and we'll continue that there thereabouts till 29
as we maintain the safety and reliability of that.
Um, how, so you've talked about the transit,
but when the vessel arrives in Singapore,
how long is it actually there for?
So it depends on how deep the, when you do a dry dock,
you create a, a specific, what we call a specification
of work with the shipyard.
And so the is going away, uh, next week
and that will have a, uh, be a 12 to 15 day period.
It's a relative light dry dock in the,
in the docking itself,
but the kataki one last year was a deeper one,
and that was, uh, I think it was 21 days in the dock.
So it just depends on the, the actual specification of
how long the shipyard needs to do the work
that you are requesting for.
Okay. Yeah,
and in, to answer your question, uh, it depends on the,
the type of workers in the depth
of the work that Duncan said.
But on an annual basis, we'd be expecting to be spending 20
to $30 million on maintenance, uh, excluding a major,
you know, event where we needed to do a repair, uh, on it.
So just standard maintenance work
and standard dry dock activity, somewhere between 20
to $30 million in year
Per per vessel?
No, for for the fleet. For the fleet or for,
That's for the three at the moment.
Well, this will be for the two going forward.
Uh, just to clarify.
Okay, so when you say there was a significant increase in
2023, no wa was that in response to,
uh, the decision that had been taken
by the government to cancel?
Uh, no. That was, as a result, we were unhappy
with our reliability and the performance of the fleet,
and we completely revamped how we do asset uh, management.
That included taking another 130 crossings off
and spending that time on maintenance, uh, restructure,
bringing in new expertise
and doing some deep obsolescence planning and replacement.
Okay. So with the decision to cancel, um,
the existing theories that were on order, what,
what was the response?
Um, how much provision was made available
for an increase in maintenance knowing that there would need
to be additional levels of maintenance given
that the existing fleet would be retained for longer?
So the, the change to the maintenance program was done,
uh, in view that we needed to improve the reliability
until 2026, which was the old program.
We've continued that same level of focus through 24, 25.
Okay. But you are not a, so you're not in a position
to give an actual budgetary commitment around what
that figure looks like for maintenance?
The, the, the cons concern of that,
and the reason why it's confidential is
we operate in a private market.
Uh, we have suppliers and contractors out there
and we have a competitor out there.
So, um, I think Jason's given you a range of, of
where our maintenance, um, trend has been.
Uh, we've certainly
for the next two years got a very clear plan of dry docking.
Um, and we have, uh, you know, the, the indicative range of
what we're looking at the two ships, we are working that
through, but as I said, it does come down
to specification. Okay.
I think I, I just clarify, within
that range would be the expected program till 2020 nines
spend profile, uh, absent any significant event
that needed repair,
that wouldn't be a standard dry dock event
or maintenance event.
Okay. Right. Any sub off that one?
So I just have one quick one,
which is we did explore briefly, I think Dave on, uh,
last week, just the benefit
of having a dry dock in New Zealand.
Um, so what I'm picking from that is
that if you were being a month, uh, a month, um, out minimum
to go to Singapore, 12 days of that being,
so it's 18 days getting there and back.
Uh, so you probably knock
That down, Mr. Chair, if you had
a, if you had a contract today
for dry dock in New Zealand would sign it
this afternoon. Yeah, yeah.
Well, I'm picking what from that,
are you gonna be saving yourself two
and a two weeks every time? It's
Considerable industry and,
and it, it's a, it's a, it's considerable,
but you also get certainty.
Yep. Um, and, uh, reduced fuel, um,
reduce time out of out of
Service and that would, that would come off that, um,
maintenance schedule as well. Absolutely,
Absolutely significant.
Any, this is off the same one
Stop off. Sorry.
Um, I'm just trying to do the math in my head
and realized I lack clarity.
Can I just go back a step?
So when you said that you engaged
or you initiated a program of increased maintenance
to get you through to 2026, which was the, uh, expected time
of the, um, canceled ferries.
So you must know what the differential is between what
that increased maintenance step is that we now have
to carry forward longer.
Yeah. So what's that step that if you can't tell us Okay.
Given commercial sensitivities, so
It would is to improve immediately the performance
as opposed of 23 on onwards.
Mm-hmm. Um, it would, it comes down to a mixture
of a reduction in, in the revenue from taking the a hundred,
130 crossings off.
And I think it was an increase of 10%
of the annual budget percent,
10%. So
that 10%, um, thank you.
You're still on Varies. Okay.
I wanna move to contingency glands,
but you come back to me. Okay. Yeah. Well, let's,
Let's, let's, uh, I'll go back to you here.
Yeah. Okay. Um, Julianne for primary.
All good. Uh, okay.
So we will be shortly down to two vessels.
Um, if one is out in, in dry dock, um, annually through
to 2029, what contingency plans have been put in place
to address the resilience of, um,
sailing opportunities for the cook strike
Cover? That,
so dry docking occurs, uh, we have two seasons in,
in the very business we have the peak season,
which is October to May in the, in the low season.
So all, all deep maintenance and dry docking
and wet docks are planned in that, in
that low requirement in the winter, uh, we, as we go,
but by pre-planning, we are able to identify
with our customers and give them warning so
that those customers can work around knowing
that they're our regular customers
and they understand the regulatory requirements of that.
Um, and then as we go, as we go through that dry docking,
we have the ability post-event, uh,
'cause we're in, we have a competitor
who does the same thing to be able to ensure that, uh,
that we can ensure that the customers can
and get the maximum capacity for that, for that time
that we're away during their maintenance period.
Adele, you wanna cover a little bit about
how we manage that with, with customers?
Yeah, There's, I mean, there's two situations.
One is the, the dry dock, which now is planned.
So, um, uh, we are confident
that we can carry the freight task in the off peak season
across three ships, which is ourselves across the,
the total cook straight fleet.
And with the industry now being able to see those dry docks,
they can plan to that as well.
So it's, it's possible to do that.
And, um, generally, um, you know,
we are seeing comfort with that.
Yesterday I was with the wholesale tourism industry.
Um, they were very comfortable, uh, with the scheduling
and timing of the dry docks.
Um, so the focus really is not that the focus is on, um,
you know, what happens if a ship goes out during peak.
Um, and you know, there is various, um, discussions underway
that we're we're having on that with freight.
The BCP is too coastal.
Um, and there are several points that Coastal, um,
can pick up freight from the north island
and take it to Christchurch.
Um, so, uh, working, we've had discussions with port
of toga, port of Auckland, port of toga, port of Napier, um,
and of course there is new Plymouth as well.
Um, and coastal regular coastal services that, um, that can,
we can shift freight to, um, for tourism.
Uh, you know, this is the, the BCP planning for them,
um, is harder.
They need to, people are on tours, um,
and, you know, when things like that happen.
So we had a really good discussion about that yesterday.
Um, and, you know, the need for them to look at their tours
and, um, think about, you know, that flight from, um,
from Wellington, your alternative there is
to, um, fly people.
Um, so we are gonna have, we've agreed
to have some good discussions
and think about what's, what's the BCP planning we can do
with the airlines, um, for their products in that space.
So we're gonna continue to look at that.
We are innovating new products, um, working
with the rental car industry, um,
as we get through these four years.
Um, and it's gonna be a process
as we spoke about yesterday very positively about
of continuous improvement and innovation
and doing that together
and us making sure we're providing good data, um,
and great communication to enable them
to set their businesses up for success
through these next four years.
Just one final question, Mr. Chair.
Um, in terms of the nature of the arrangements
with Blue Bridge, we heard last week that an alternative,
you know, option is, is Blue Bridge,
is there a contractual arrangement in
place with Blue Bridge?
So Blue Bridge is a competitor
and that comes with a lot of clear guidelines
and what, how that works post event.
Uh, uh, we have an arrangement, uh, when either, um,
in the unplanned disruption of Blue Bridge that we're able
to take their customers or,
or reciprocate to ensure that New Zealanders are able
to get across the straight when they need to.
And when that, um, arrangement has been activated,
HH who, who, who needs
to activate it most Bluebridge or the Inter Islander?
Well, I think over a 60 year, uh, 60 year period.
I think you could have some interesting discussions on that.
Look over January, uh, in inter island it very well,
you know, our competitor had mechanical
failures over January.
We were, you know, 99% capacity,
so into Ireland to really lean in there.
Uh, but I think, I think you're fair
to say in the last three years, I think we've all had a,
we've both had a share of issues
and we've both got a good relationship where we'll step in
and, uh, help the market.
Thank you. And just to be clear, uh,
just probably the obvious one,
but, uh, there's never any dry dock.
So you will, you will say, Hey,
we're gonna dry dock in June,
and they'll say, okay, we'll go in July. Yeah. To,
To, to your point, Mr.
Chair, that Connie Ma is going in in August Yes.
Dry dock, so, yeah. Yeah.
Okay. So that makes sense. Okay, so Juliani, oh,
Thank you so much.
Actually, my questions were somewhat related to, um,
the being down ferries
and particularly the impact of losing a rail enabled ferry,
the only rail enabled ferry
until we get the replacement ships.
Um, I did ask some questions last week about this
and heard that there wasn't too much
expected impact on real freight customers.
Um, but I was wondering if you could speak well, one, like
how confident are you that, um,
this won't impact rail freight between the north
and south island, having to do the road bridging
and like what can, what gives you that confidence?
And then too about kiwi rail's own like operations
and needing to move, um, rail maintenance vehicles,
whatever, between the north and south island? Yep. Okay.
Adele, you wanna go? So the first point is that there,
there is, there's tradeoffs
with the situation over the next four years,
so there's absolutely no doubt about that.
Those tradeoffs are in, um, the capacity,
total rail capacity across the ferries.
So it's a reduction of, um, from 32 wagons down to 24.
So that's, that's the first, you know,
really tangible impact.
Um, and that 24 is a time constraint.
So that's about how long it takes to operate the turn, um,
for rail, uh, with a road bridge solution.
Um, and there's also a cost to that, uh, you know,
a significant additional cost.
Um, it requires different equipment, more people, um,
and we have, um, scaled up, uh, in order to be able
to provide a service
and keep our time gate, which is critical for the market,
the freight market from Auckland to Christchurch.
Um, so those are the trade-offs. It's time and money.
Um, and, you know, we're working through that at the moment.
How do we know it's gonna work?
Well, our people have a lot of experience.
We, we road bridge today. Um, so we have a good sense of it.
The key to the next four years
is about having a really strong continuous improvement
mindset and about, um, you know, we are gonna go into this.
We, we are well placed,
we understand our operation well in the modeling.
Um, we are confident in it and our people are confident.
Um, and what we're gonna have to be good at is learning
as we go through and adjusting and being agile to get better
and better over the, over the four years to try
and minimize impacts.
Um, and it's necessary.
You know, we need these new, uh, ships,
we've got to get through this.
Um, and so far, you know, the cooperation with the industry,
uh, with both freight and tourism
passenger has been excellent.
And, you know, we're seeing a real spirit of cooperation
and a and a spirit of we will get through this together
with great communication, um,
and taking a a learning approach.
Can I mm-hmm. Yeah. I mean, you might wanna say more,
but like 32 to 24, that's like a 25% reduction in capacity.
Yeah. Um, is there space mm-hmm.
Like, I mean, can that just shift to trucks
or is there not even really capacity for
an increase in freight shifting to trucks on this ferries?
Like will it be a shift to coastal shipping, do you think?
Um, look, we, we think over the day,
so it's the premium train that that runs at night,
which is our 19 hour service between Auckland
and Christchurch, um, where, you know,
we will feel the constraint,
but we've been working with our customers
and we have been able to,
not all freight needs to move quickly.
Mm-hmm. Um, so when we look at our services over the day,
we can handle the freight task
and we have some headroom, um,
across all of our train services.
So we're comfortable with that.
We have worked with our customers
and some of that, that freight will spread onto our slower
service, um, Auckland to Christchurch.
Um, and that's all looking fine.
There is, it does put a constraint on us, uh, in the next,
over the next four years.
Um, but road is the alternative.
Um, and, you know, freight can shift onto road.
Um, so that's that.
I think coastal is, in our view the BCP solution
and I think we've got plenty of time for those months,
you know, that the dry docks are in place, um, for people
to plan that in advance
and plan the freight task in advance.
And that's the key thing in logistics,
when people have got time, um, you know,
those arrangements can be made quite easily actually.
Um, but coastals, um, disadvantages time
and, you know, it is the slowest, it is the slowest mode,
uh, in the least reliable mode just because of shipping and
Limited capacity. That's
right. So it's, um, we think, we think,
you know, we can do it with shifted freight effectively
and at the moment, um, yeah, we are happy with where we sit
with our planning with customers. In,
In terms of your second question, um, David, maybe we,
we just talk, don't talk about moving tampers, uh, machines,
EMA over to the south island.
Yeah, I thing, as I said last week,
we're in a program at the moment of moving
what we can south now.
Uh, our, basically our production machinery will be
established in the south island.
We won't need to move that across our measurement machinery,
which traverses both islands.
We will have to be deck cargo
And as we start to position in the next four years,
you know, we will be setting up, for example,
rail welding facilities in South island.
Um, and, you know, we'll have, uh, particular, uh, tampers
and equipment based in the south island for the longer term.
Can you stop soft, Julianne? Okay. I've got two.
Um, just the first one of them is just in, in, when you,
when the, the business case was being done for
behind the decision to go rail enabled,
there must have been some numbers, uh, which kind
of alluding to some numbers in terms of the, um, the saving,
uh, both time, but also money
and maybe you can convert the time to money to the business
for having rail enabled versus non rail enabled.
Can you give us a, you, if you can't give us an exact number
because there's some whatever commerciality,
but a rough order of magnitude of what it means
to the business, the benefit to the business in terms
of forget the capital cost,
but they, the operational benefit, um, of rail enabled.
Doug was there.
Uh, yeah. So it is more rail, uh,
road bridging is more complex and does take additional time.
There's a different, uh, labor cost
to run the container terminal.
Um, I think the, the big focus on the rail enabled ships
that are coming is the scope for growth
and the ability for each carrier to carry 40 wagons.
Uh, Dale just spoke about road bridging being kept at 24,
uh, due to the space in Picton.
So the key thing is, uh,
post the four years when the new furs arrive, it's,
it's the 30 years after that
and the capacity to grow the rail freight,
which is the key part of,
So, but there must be a,
there must be an operational saving.
I mean, you, you've already alluded
to having more staff taking more time.
Yeah. Um, so there must be an operational,
even if there were no growth whatsoever.
Yes. There'd be an operational saving.
Yep. The operational,
What does that, what does that look like
Roughly?
It's between sort of five and $11 million.
We're still working out the, the detail of that as we,
So that gives us an order of magnitude anyway.
Yeah. Okay. Can I ask another sub?
You can go, go for it and then I'll come
Back. Um, I mean, it's sort
of the same que well,
maybe I didn't ask it clearly enough before.
Um, like are you aware of like how much capacity there is
for freight, um, moving across the Cook St.
Street, if it's going on the ferries via truck?
Like, 'cause I, I'm just interested in like,
is there enough capacity,
let's say all the rail freight shifted to truck.
Is there even, is, is there the capacity for that
or does it, does it not matter?
Is it basically the same capacity whether it gets
to the ferry by truck or by rail?
It's the same. Yes. We look at the, there'll
Be a reduction 'cause it's one fewer ferry, right? Yeah,
Yeah, yeah. The
lane meters are not totally fungible on the ferry.
I think I'm right about that. Right.
Um, so we can't, there are decks which are only suitable
for passenger vehicles, for example,
you can't take a truck Okay.
Um, up there. And I think where we've,
or a train Or a train, yeah.
Or where we can't work the trestles.
So it's not, it's not totally open, um, ended.
Um, but there is enough overall for us
to manage the freight task. Yeah.
Okay. Switch,
Switch the topic a little bit. Yeah. Dan, you want to
Oh, yeah, you go.
Yeah. Um, more about growth, but, oh, okay. Yeah.
Good morning. Um, just switching the topic a bit,
we've had a bit of conversation with the minister about, um,
growth in the south island, so, you know, um, uh,
passenger and freight.
Um, I'm just wondering if you can, um,
help us understand the growth in the north island, um,
particularly, you know, for both passengers and and freight.
Where is that coming from?
You know, what's your expectation of, you know,
how big that growth is?
Um, I know cities like Hamilton are growing strong,
wondering if there's a greater, um, uh, opportunity
between the Auckland Hamilton route,
but yeah, just wanted to understand
Maybe Yeah, I'll do regional.
Yeah. Look, um, in the North Island,
um, I guess there's a,
there's a question about the overall freight task,
um, in the future.
And we're very much looking forward to, um,
MOT doing the next national freight demand study.
Um, because we'd really love to see some data too.
Look, we know from the customers that we are speaking to
and, and we, we service, um, what their profiles look like.
Those are confidential.
Um, but overall we think the freight task in the North
island is probably, um,
at an aggregate level, slightly declining.
Um, and that's off the back of the primary sector, um,
and primarily due to export.
And that's, um, a a few reasons.
It's a shift in where, um, the fat balance.
Um, and I think that, um, the dairy sector is better
to speak to that to than me.
Um, but, um, yeah, where that, where that sits overall.
Um, and forestry, of course is driven by price.
Um, and, you know,
we're all sitting looking at different crystal balls on
what's gonna go on demand in India versus China.
I think the industry is pivoting nicely, um,
when you look at those numbers out of China
and into India, which is, uh, which is a, you know,
a really good thing, but ultimately, um, you know,
price will determine that, um, over the next, in the future.
Um, so then there's the question
that's at an aggregate level on the freight task,
and then there's, um, road versus rail.
Um, and certainly our plan is very clear, um, that, um,
you know, we would like to take more, um,
of the freight task onto rail and that's our goal
and everything we're doing is, is geared towards that.
Um, so that's that.
And then I think inter-regional passing rail
before I hand over to David on Metros, certainly, um,
capital Connection and Teya TE has been a great success.
Um, and we're very, um, feel very pleased for the councils,
uh, involved in the delivery of that service.
Um, we're currently looking at, um, adding, um,
the Sunday service, um, there, which, um, you know,
has been spoken about, uh, and we're working through that.
So definitely, um, there is,
there is growth there in that service.
Fantastic. Um, yeah,
Could you elaborate more on the two?
Um, you know, 'cause I understand you've got a relationship
with, um, councils
and there's, you know, what category Yeah.
And, um, is there, uh, a sense that
because of that growth, that that service may be more, um,
you know, priced in a, um, market driven manner.
So for example, there's benefits going rail
between the cities, so maybe their price relative
to other modes might be higher
That, so that is a question
for why could a regional council Yeah.
So it's their product. Okay. And I can't speak to that.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Fantastic. Definitely a question for them.
Thank you. Okay. I, I wanted
to ask SAP on, um, interregional
Passenger rail.
Um, we asked, in fact, we've got some enthusiasm for, um,
the Southerner, uh, service Yes.
To be more than just one off.
So I know the first time it went very, very well. Yes.
Couldn't actually get, although the trial went very well,
'cause it's damn hard to get, actually get a ticket.
Um, uh, so looking forward to the next one.
Um, just what's your thinking around that?
We, we asked, uh, um, the minister last week mm-hmm.
And he seemed pretty keen on extending, um, yeah.
Longer distance passenger rail. Mm-hmm. Yep.
Um, so, so first one is, is
that bit secondly is how's the overall, um,
you said plus 22% in revenue, I think Yes.
Which is pretty good. So is it washing its own faces?
Um, and, uh,
and thirdly can just unpick a little bit the Tahu one
because started with, uh, some challenges,
but if it's going well, you know, how
what does going well mean in that context?
So three, three areas of question.
Sure. Um, all right.
So starting with, um, the Southerner, uh,
so there's two different markets that we're talking about,
and the Southerner, um, as it's being run as in a,
is a tourism product.
So our tourism train business is not subsidized.
It is a, a standalone business, um, that is self-funding.
Um, and the Southerner has been run as part of,
as a tourism service and, and a one-off product.
Um, that certainly has been extremely popular
and we've been really quite delighted with it.
Right. Um, so, um, the, the, so there's,
so there's that, and we are looking at, um, that service
and, you know, what would could be the rhythm
that we consider that on an ongoing basis from a tourism
standpoint as a result of the strong demand, um,
that we experienced for it.
There's another conversation,
and it's important not to confuse the two about a, um,
inter-regional passenger service.
Yes. Which is a regular, um, daily service that
as a conversation is not part of what we do.
That would be in the remit of councils, um,
to decide whether
or not there was demand from their
communities for such a service.
And there's a separate process, um, that starts
between councils and NZTA
and requires business casing, um,
for interregional passenger rail.
So Kiwi Rail is not involved in the promotion
of interregional passenger services.
The role we play is as an can play, is as an operator,
um, for council's wishing
to put in place an inter-regional passenger service.
So I just wanna be really clear about that.
Um, it would not be our call, uh,
nor our mandate to look at a permanent, um,
commuter solution.
If there were a proposition such as that, could it coexist
with a tourism pro product?
Because you don't do that anywhere else?
I mean, the tourism products are
tourism products and mm-hmm.
And the passenger products are passenger products,
but they're not, they're not sitting on the same train.
Mm-hmm. Could, could they coexist?
Um, well we, they'd likely be very different products.
Yeah. So, um, the, the piece
that's really driving the revenue lift in our tourism
service is our premium new premium carriages.
Yeah. Uh, which are proving extremely popular.
If I could snap my fingers and had endless capital, uh,
and could turn every carriage into a premium carriage, uh,
we would sell them out.
It is a great change. Yeah, it is. It is.
It is spectacular. Um,
and what we should be aspiring to as a country
as well in our tourism products.
Um, so, you know, that's
where we are headed, uh, with tourism.
A commuter service would be a, um, I imagine a much more,
uh, everyday experience.
Um, so we'd, we'd, the demand
for those two things comes from very different places.
Um, you know, what is it an international tourist,
um, uh, market.
And the other is, um, everyday New Zealanders,
um, going up and down the country.
So different demand pools, could they coexist together, um,
but they just wouldn't be,
they're just not the same product. No,
I, I fully understand that.
That's why I asked the question. And to who you,
so can you just spell that out a little bit more?
Uh, who, So, so what's it doing in terms of, you know,
Well, I think, you know, from our perspective
and what Kiwi rail controls
and can speak to is really the customer experience
that's been delivered and they've had it got 99%, um,
approval rating, um, I'm going
to proudly take a a a about on behalf of our teams.
They deliver just a really wonderful experience to people.
Um, you know, traveling from Hamilton, um, to Auckland
and it's grown.
It's, it's one of those things where, um, it takes a while
for people to form new habits.
Um, and what you've seen is that commuter habit, um,
forming, uh, why could a regional counselor gain are the
right people to speak about that
and who, um, it's their product.
They hold all of the information about the customer data
and you know, who's on it and not all of those things.
Um, and it's for them to speak to that.
Um, but certainly for us as an operator, um,
we are very proud of the, the service that our teams, um,
have been providing on that.
And I think you're just seeing something that's useful and,
and proven to be useful, um, for a chunk of commuters.
Cool. Um, Tanya, you on this ones
and then I'm going to go to, thank you.
I think I had Dan next as a, as a sub as well.
I'm, I'm conscious we're gonna, we're gonna all
that time. Thanks, Mr.
Chair. Um, does that quite extend
to the capital connection service as well?
Does that pride? Pride, Absolutely.
Yeah. Absolutely. And, um, no, we've got wonderful teams
that, um, that service people every
day on those on those lines. Yeah. Good
To hear that. Um, just
my questions around clarity really.
So, um, as the chair has said,
the minister was quite emphatic around inter, uh,
regional passenger rail, um, in, in,
in the south particular sun.
So you say that that's a matter for the councils, um,
and NZTA to work through.
Yeah. Is there any role for Kiwi Rail, uh, given
that the minister has, uh, signaled a desire to
teach, explore this?
Look, I look absolutely.
If, if, if the funding in there
and, uh, the plan there,
our role is to help coordinate that.
Yep. So for example, to Hui has started, uh, initially David
and I went down and we helped the regional councils
understand the cost of rolling stock, the timetable.
So we have a key information and a guidance role,
but, uh, without a doubt, if that's on the table for funding
and planning, you know, I mean, we'll run it
and we'll operate it and we'll be there helping
it come to fruition.
It's just not our role to lead. Sure.
The funding plan discussion.
No, no, that's helpful. Thanks, Julianne.
Oh yeah. So, um, in terms of like in future improvements
to something like thuya, that wouldn't be your role
to like develop a business case
or say, Hey, this is going really well,
but if we could get this extra investment, we could
increase the services and reduce the travel time
and that would grow the patronage.
Mm-hmm. You're not in a position to do that?
We answer. So we, again,
it's Waka our regional council's role to do that.
Okay. And our role is to just, as Peter said, we coordinate,
help them with the costing of that
and, um, what that would require in terms staff, et cetera.
We, the o we just operate it.
Okay. So the additional service they looked at,
they were obviously talking with us about
how absolutely we do this together. Okay.
So is the, are you talking about that
Which, which timetabling?
Yeah. You know, what does that mean?
Staffing, um, staffing, uh, do you have the train drivers?
Uh, so that's, that, that, that they'll lead
that discussion with our people.
Dell's team has been sitting down
with the, with the council on that. So
We, our expertise in operation
Up, up, up.
Sorry, just quick up, sorry.
Um, so, um, with ra agreeing with the, um,
Canterbury Regional Council to also look at a similar, um,
well to look at, um, providing some help
with a business case for the ton ran, would
that include, um, feasibility on top
of just the logistics
of whether there are enough chain drivers
and timetabling and all that? You
Gonna cover that? 'cause
What's the nature of the information?
The nature of the information would be
around the logistics of it as opposed
to the commercial feasibility.
Because again, the business case is between council and,
and NZTA Yeah. Who do the funding.
Thank you, Carlos.
Hi. Thank you for coming.
Um, it's good to hear that you said 99% of
approval rates from your customer.
Mm-hmm. So what causing the level of trust
and confidence in the service, in especially in Auckland,
which new laws in October, 2024, since then,
what have you done to improve the confidence
and trust in this?
This is on the Auckland metric. Yeah,
I, I can speak to that.
I think Carlos, you, you, you, you,
you addressed this question a little bit, uh, last week.
Right? At the moment, demand in the opera metro area is, is,
uh, suppressed without doubt.
We are engaged on an exercise
of substantial rebuild off the network.
As Peter alluded to at the start, this type of rebuild ought
to have been done over a previous 25
years that was never funded.
Mm-hmm. So we, to be ready for city rail link, uh, uh,
doing an unusually large amount
of disruptive renewals in an unusually short time.
Mm-hmm. So the, let's just say the,
the customer experience at the moment is abnormal
because of that, uh, we aim
to have completed all our major highly disruptive works.
By the end of Christmas, we'd cover more blocks to go,
and then we are outta the ground
and starting much more of our renewals work is fixing the
tops, which can be done much quicker
with much shorter shutdowns.
So the type of things that Auckland commuters been dealing
with now for the last period of Christmas holiday shuts
two weeks in Easter, two weeks coming up in
July, September, et cetera.
That is an unusual situation. Mm-hmm.
Circumstances are requiring us to do that.
It's a massive infrastructure deficit
and basically we're just swallowing a very large
amount of work in a short amount of time.
But the counterfactual was, you don't do that.
You just do a little bit. You open up city rail link,
you've got, you know, four to $5 billion worth
of investment in it, and then we start digging out the
tracks, which was just would've been an untenable situation.
So the current, current suite of commuters
for this four to five years are effectively bearing the cost
of non-investment over the previous 20 to 25.
Since you talk about maintenance, is it
because the way we build our will in New Zealand
are different with other country?
Because I don't see that kind
of disruption happening in other country like that.
It because other country actually when they build,
they got a, a spare track to, for, for the train to use?
Or, or, or what's the reason of that?
Okay. Uh, again, it comes back
to the nature of the maintenance.
We are doing, uh, routine maintenance,
just say replacing rail, uh,
or replacing sleepers, et cetera.
We are, we are competitive with other,
other countries throughout the world.
Uh, you know, spare tracks just in case it's just a luxury.
New Zealand rail doesn't have, I mean, most
of our rail is in fact syn track,
so you have to walk around it.
But I come back to the nature
of the work we're doing at the moment, railways,
although Deutsche Van is actually heading down this pathway,
you don't normally spend 18 months
basically rebuilding the rail.
We will have built in Auckland by the end of this,
over 30 kilometers of brand new rail on an existing railway.
It's, it's just, it is abnormal. What we're doing
Is, um, my second question is,
I should look into your half year report,
half year financial report.
I can see that it seems like there,
there's an increase in the operational expenses
and actually outgrow the increase in operational revenues.
Does that mean that we actually got less customer using the,
the, the will or,
or what is the reason causing that, that the,
you know, the differences?
I think when, when we look at our financials, um,
for the halves, it's always important
to think about them half on half as well,
because we're a very seasonal business reflecting the
seasonal activity of particularly
agricultural production in New Zealand.
So the first three months of our financial year,
our quietest quarter, um, being the winter months over here
in terms of the, the operations, we had a number of events,
uh, in the first half hit us.
So the PHI tunnel closure for the coal, uh,
coming from the west coast over to Littleton, we've caught
that up in the second half of the year.
Um, and so there's a,
a much better performance in the second half
to the first half for some of those operational matters.
And the seasonality that's, that's in there.
We have, as Peter said, over the course of this year,
also dropped a few, dropped, uh, a number of our costs
through and early in the year, we did do some restructuring
of the cost of that redundancies
at the first part of the year.
And the benefits flow through the, the balance of the year.
So the second half
of the year will look significantly better
than the first half of the year.
And, and the first half you also saw Winston pulp closure.
That's a significant freight volume that,
that left the business around about August, September.
Yes. Because one thing I look into is
that we reset from the customer
because like you say, really to compare the same period.
So when, when the financial year end on 30
3rd of December, 2023, the,
the income is $475.5 million,
but on the same period of time, on 30 3rd of December, 2024,
your report a drop on $466.9 million.
Yeah. So does that mean
that we got less customer using the service or,
or what was the cost of that less of, you know,
to reduce income?
No, so, so the first we were hit as, um, as Peter
and Jason have said we were hit in the first half was two
very, very large volume impacts PHI Tunnel collapse.
And that's, that closed the coal program. Mm-hmm.
Um, which in terms of tonnage
and in terms of dollars is a, is a very,
will always be a very significant lumpy hit for us.
And then WPI, um,
and, um, their closure, um,
those were the two primary things.
Now over the year, um, we have worked very hard.
The team has worked very hard to build new business.
Um, and, uh, has done, it's been a year of running very hard
to stand still because of those
offsets that we've experienced.
Um, but that's come through in the, in the second half.
So it really was a couple
of unexpected un forecast major events that hit,
um, hit that first half.
So it's not, um, I guess is it less customers overall
that we're gonna see this year?
No, we've actually brought on more new customers,
but we have lost, uh, with WPIA very valuable
and very important and
what had been a very long standing customer for us.
You also see in the economy, you know, due July, August
last year, significant down trading in terms of, you know,
ports, um, oh yeah.
Export and importing. So the economy was really grinding
out last year.
So we, we, we are there, we are the economy
and as it comes up and downs, we'll, we, we there,
so a number of factors. That's
Right. Yeah.
Two, two quick subs off that one.
Um, uh, nobody else has got one.
Um, first one of those is just in terms
of the asset management, um, side of things, all of
that is gonna be reflected
or known to the infrastructure commission
as they have developing their national infrastructure plan.
Yes. Yeah. And we look forward to that.
In fact, I was talking to a few of the people at, at the,
uh, the launch of the plan yesterday.
Um, so we've been investing, uh, for some time now in, uh,
asset management strategies,
asset management plans by asset class.
As you, as you've heard from me in island,
there's been a significant turnaround there.
Um, we, we do asset management maturity
audits on an annual basis.
Um, so we, we look forward to working with,
uh, um, the various people.
We have a very, uh, disciplined asset management register.
We understand the asset condition.
There's still a lot, lot of work
to do on there that's high and above rail.
Yeah. There's still a lot of, a lot more work to do
around the asset data strategy,
but we are building our knowledge
and competency around the state of our assets.
Um, it's an ongoing basis,
but in the last four years,
there's been a quite a big investment in
that asset management, planning commitment, um, data,
uh, asset, uh, integrity.
And the other question is just around, uh,
freight customer, freight customers.
Mm-hmm. And just the satisfaction of that.
So when you go travel around,
aren't the only people ever say anything,
and usually the ones who complain,
I do hear a few complaints about customer service.
Um mm-hmm. Just can you just give some reassurances about
how you're dealing with that and,
and how you monitor customer satisfaction?
Yeah, absolutely. So we, Um,
Yeah, no, look, we, um, we're aware of
where our CNPS score is at,
and we have a, a very thorough plan to address that.
Um, the first, um, you know, and I, I've spoken about this
before, the, the key areas, uh, for us are first service.
So as a logistics business delivery in full
and on time is critical in good
Condition. That's right.
A hundred percent.
And so, um, which is in full.
So, uh, that's our first thing.
We've got a clear plan in place to, we know we are not
where we need to be in all segments.
Um, some places we're doing very well, um,
and are already at, um, world class levels.
Um, but in domestic, we're still too inconsistent, um,
and not where we want to be as a business.
So we are working hard at that.
We have a goal, uh, this year to get to 90% delivery
and full on time lifting to 95%, um, uh, the year after.
And there is a, a very large work program in behind that.
Um, and the issues are multifaceted.
Um, so we're onto that
and working very hard with our, um, top customers on a,
on a branch by branch basis, on a reset there.
Um, so that's service, which is, I,
I think first and most fundamental.
Then second has been just
how Kiwi has been difficult to do business with.
And I think where that really shows up as customers
where they're doing new infrastructure.
And the past Kiwi Rail has been, um, you know,
our data shows us and,
and our own reflections, uh, we've been siloed
and people have found it to very difficult to find their way
around the organization.
So we've changed the way we're working on
infrastructure projects.
We are putting a customer liaison role in so
that people don't have to sort of deal
with five different people.
Um, and some basics like that.
Um, and then there's customer experience.
So that's how people come in
and how easy it is to even pick up the phone
and find Kiwi Rail, how easy it is
to set up a customer account
and how easy it is to understand our products and services.
And we've got a really large work program across that.
Um, we've made, we're totally re-platformed.
I'll just give you a couple of examples.
Um, we've re-platformed entirely our contact centers, um,
which used to just work off, uh, individual emails.
And we now, we have a modern contact
and case system where we call it
single view of the customer.
So for a customer, um,
all communication is kept in one place.
Um, as you move from um, service agent to service agent,
everyone can see what's going on and what the issue is
and could give you continuous service over that to fix it.
Um, disruption management is another key
area of focus for us.
So we've been the industry's view,
and I think, you know, there's some illegitimacy to it,
is when Kiwi Rail sees itself as an island
and doesn't work as part of a system
and part of the industry to help in disruption, we can move
to trucks and, uh, we'd need to work
with our customers more on that.
And we've had a really big focus on improving our disruption
management and working closely with our customers.
So, um, that's just a, a smattering.
There's a, there's a large work program across the customer
journey on customer experience that we, we are working on.
Um, we are clear on our data, we're just going out
to the market now to resurvey.
Um, and we'll test our work program against the data
that we get back and what our customers tell us,
and we'll pivot our direction in accordance with that.
Um, so we are listening, we're learning,
and we're acting, um, and we're not there yet,
but we are, we have a very clear
plan in place to improve it. Cool.
I'm, I'm gonna go to Cam for a sec. The primary, sorry.
Thank you. J It's, uh, yeah,
it's a question blows on nicely from that answer actually.
It's that one of your existing customers,
uh, Coca-Cola mm-hmm.
You're Pacific Building New Siding at Mount
Wellington Distribution Center.
Yes. Uh, you got KI Rail had a big part of that.
You are you to tell us the cost of that on time and, and,
and all those sort of, uh, numbers.
Um, uh, I can't share the cost of that.
It would be Coca-Cola's information to share. Okay.
Um, but it certainly was completed successfully.
Um, and that has been,
that has actually been an incredibly successful story.
Coca-Cola in our fourth largest domestic customer, um,
and we are putting on, um, more volume regularly.
So that's working very well.
Okay. And the reason I ask about, uh, completed on time
and the cost of the process mm-hmm.
From the previous answer, how are you replicating
what happened there mm-hmm.
To try and track new customers. Mm-hmm.
So new, uh, the time.
He's got a, uh, great new deal going, um, down atda. Mm-hmm.
Uh, you've got business park Yes.
Other business parks around Yes. The country.
How are you taking what happened at Mount Wellington mm-hmm.
And using it to attract new customers?
Yeah. Look, I think on, um, sightings
and infrastructure, we know we need to be able
to deliver sightings at a cheaper price, um, for customers.
As I said, we've, um, done a lot
of work in our own internal processes,
and that's going very well.
So, um, we now have a, a, you know,
clear customer lead on each project.
I think we are working with the industry. It's well known.
That's signaling, it's very, very expensive.
Um, and we do actually have a project underway to try
and get more of a kit set approach to sightings so
that we can deliver them faster and cheaper.
But it is, you know, it is, we sit in the middle
of an industry which has constraints
and David can can speak to that more.
Um, but we are certainly gotta focus on
how can we deliver these cheaper and, and, um, faster.
In all honesty, I don't think I have anything more to add
to what Ade but she's quite correct.
Uh, the, the cost is signaling
and we do need,
I guess you'd call it an introductory product,
which is cheaper, which has potentially a shorter life.
And so basically you don't build something which is,
it doesn't give you through life cost,
but gets you introduction.
Okay, we've gotta find a, an entry product.
So, uh, so that's something that you work,
this is something that Q Rail's working
on, start rolling up.
These projects are coming online. Yes. Okay.
Um, can I go to Julianne?
Yes, you probably should. Okay. Julianne.
Oh, sorry. I have like three primaries. Three
I I think the reality is we'd probably like to have you
for two hours, not one, but you know, that's life.
Yeah. Um, I guess I was, I was,
I was gonna ask about like pricing, um, for freight
and like if you see any opportunities
to have more like direct pricing to cover, um,
capital and maintenance costs of certain lines
and whether you like the pricing
for customers is accurately reflecting the cost, like
for example, the West coast line.
Um
Mm-hmm. So
we have, um, the way, um, the funding works as you know,
is that the infrastructure, um,
rail infrastructure is funded through ANet
and what customers pay is something called a Tuck.
Um, a track user charge. Yeah, yeah.
Which is size to cover a portion of wear
and tear on the network from their, um,
from their net 10 kilometers.
Um, so that's, that is how we think about the contribution
to the below rail infrastructure.
And then our pricing for
above rail is based on getting a sustainable return, um,
on our above rail assets.
And that means that we can replace
that rolling stock over the long term in the future
and do not need to draw down, um, on, um, the crown.
So that's our goal, and that's where we are headed.
We know that return on capital that we need, um,
across the network in order to achieve that.
Um, and that is forming the base
and the guardrail for all of our negotiations going forward.
But we're, we're also, as you know, we're part
of a system, so transport pricing is, is,
is a challenge and issue that, that
as an industry we need to work through.
And obviously there are some, um, initiatives in that play
around congestion, pricing, et cetera.
So as we, as we start to look at road pricing
and rail pricing, we can start to think about
how we price different parts of the network.
Yeah. Yeah. So I, I mean,
I guess I totally understand like the public benefit
of investing in the rail line,
but is there a risk that the way it's currently working
that, you know, new Zealanders might be subsidizing private
business interests, like
for an off season coal mine on the west coast?
Um, rather than investing in the parts of the network
that have the most public benefit,
Um, look, we'll have to go through, through line by line,
but obviously through the rail review, um,
there's a track access fee methodology set.
Uh, we've gone through
and done a lot of work on our network economics
and look at each part, part of the network as a state
and enterprise as SOE,
we have a commercial mindset focus on that.
So, um, our job is to make sure that, um,
we're pricing, um, the product for the customer,
um, at the level where we can make money, that there is a,
there's a pathway to the tuck,
and we are not got, we can't do it by ourselves.
It's got to be part of what's happening
with road user charges is important.
What's happening with, with Tuck is important,
but we have an upward trajectory to make sure
that there is more user pays from our network.
Is, is the philosophy of thing, which we're trying to take.
Yeah. I, I absolutely focused on,
on value return across the network in terms
of commercial recovery as well.
So that's there. But, um, you know,
across the country there's different levels of activity
and return on that as well.
Um, and as there is in roads.
So it's not unique to just rail,
it's the same challenge in roads in terms of circumstances,
which comes back to what's the, the right pricing
for the transport system as on.
Yeah. Oh, that's true. Okay. Look, we are at time.
Um, thank you very much.
It would've been a great, I think, think, I mean,
I had half my questions still to go.
I'm sure that that's true for some of the others as well.
So, um, more time at some later stage would be good.
Can I just, um, say you will be aware, we're doing a,
an inquiry into the mari ports
and maritime sector, which also includes the relationship
with hinterlands and the transport networks, et cetera,
the service center lands.
I know that some of your customers are very, very keen
to submit, you know, forestry companies
and um, uh, you know, uh, agricultural
or cultural companies as well.
Mm-hmm. And we'd love to get your views on, you know,
how it best works, how the inland ports work,
the connections to ports work best, any opportunities
that there are, any challenges that there are.
Um, we've, we've asked for,
we've invited initial submissions by the 12th, um, of July.
Uh, if we don't hear from you,
we'll probably reach out anyway,
but it'll be good to, you know, have your initial thoughts.
It'll be great to help us with our, with our thinking.
Okay, sure. We'll, we'll, we'll, we'll pick that up. Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
That, that comes from, thank you.